---
layout: book
title: Surely You're joking Mr. Feynman
author: Richard P. Feynman
isbn: 0393316041
rating: 7
---

Funny anecdotes that often surprise you with deep insights about how
to live a joyful life. I was struck by Feynman's almost naive way
of being honest, curious, and true to himself. The books is a joy to read
since the lightness of the comedy balances the more challenging science
portions.

### Notes:

> They had some plant cells in there, and you could see some little green spots
called chloroplasts (they make sugar when light shines on them) circulating
around. I looked at them and then looked up: “How do they circulate? What pushes
them around?” I asked. Nobody knew. It turned out that it was not understood at
that time. So right away I found out something about biology: it was very easy
to find a question that was very interesting, and that nobody knew the answer
to. In physics you had to go a little deeper before you could find an
interesting question that people didn’t know.

>I was asked to stop working on the stuff I was doing in my group and go down and
take over the IBM group, and I tried to avoid the disease. And, although they
had done only three problems in nine months, I had a very good group. The real
trouble was that no one had ever told these fellow, anything. The army had
selected them from all over the country for a thing called Special Engineer
Detachment—clever boys from high school who had engineering ability. They sent
them up to Los Alamos. They put them in barracks. And they would tell them
nothing. Then they came to work, and what they had to do was work on IBM
machines—punching holes, numbers that they didn’t understand. Nobody told them
what it was. The thing was going very slowly. I said that the first thing there
has to be is that these technical guys know what we’re doing. Oppenheimer went
and talked to the security and got special permission so I could give a nice
lecture about what we were doing, and they were all excited: “We’re fighting a
war! We see what it is!” They knew what the numbers meant. If the pressure came
out higher, that meant there was more energy released, and so on and so on. They
knew what they were doing. Complete transformation! They began to invent ways of
doing it better. They improved the scheme. They worked at night. They didn’t
need supervising in the night; they didn’t need anything. They understood
everything; they invented several of the programs that we used. So my boys
really came through, and all that had to be done was to tell them what it was.
As a result, although it took them nine months to do three problems before, we
did nine problems in three months, which is nearly ten times as fast.

>And Von Neumann gave me an interesting idea: that you don’t have to be
responsible for the world that you’re in. So I have developed a very powerful
sense of social irresponsibility as a result of Von Neumann’s advice. It’s made
me a very happy man ever since. But it was Von Neumann who put the seed in that
grew into my active irresponsibility!

>Then the son told me what happened. The last time he was there, Bohr said to his
son, “Remember the name of that little fellow in the back over there? He’s the
only guy who’s not afraid of me, and will say when I’ve got a crazy idea. So
next time when we want to discuss ideas, we’re not going to be able to do it
with these guys who say everything is yes, yes, Dr. Bohr. Get that guy and we’ll
talk with him first.” I was always dumb in that way. I never knew who I was
talking to. I was always worried about the physics. If the idea looked lousy, I
said it looked lousy. If it looked good, I said it looked good. Simple
proposition. I’ve always lived that way. It’s nice, it’s pleasant—if you can do
it. I’m lucky in my life that I can do this.

>Jerry turned out to be a very good teacher. He told me first to go home and draw
anything. So I tried to draw a shoe; then I tried to draw a flower in a pot. It
was a mess! The next time we met I showed him my attempts: “Oh, look!” he said.
“You see, around in back here, the line of the flower pot doesn’t touch the
leaf.” (I had meant the line to come up to the leaf.) “That’s very good. It’s a
way of showing depth. That’s very clever of you.” “And the fact that you don’t
make all the lines the same thickness (which I didn’t mean to do) is good. A
drawing with all the lines the same thickness is dull.” It continued like that:
Everything that I thought was a mistake, he used to teach me something in a
positive way. He never said it was wrong; he never put me down. So I kept on
trying, and I gradually got a little bit better, but I was never satisfied.

>Then I had another thought: Physics disgusts me a little bit now, but I used to
enjoy doing physics. Why did I enjoy it? I used to play with it. I used to do
whatever I felt like doing—it didn’t have to do with whether it was important
for the development of nuclear physics, but whether it was interesting and
amusing for me to play with. When I was in high school, I’d see water running
out of a faucet growing narrower, and wonder if I could figure out what
determines that curve. I found it was rather easy to do. I didn’t have to do it;
it wasn’t important for the future of science; somebody else had already done
it. That didn’t make any difference: I’d invent things and play with things for
my own entertainment. So I got this new attitude. Now that I am burned out and
I’ll never accomplish anything, I’ve got this nice position at the university
teaching classes which I rather enjoy, and just like I read the Arabian Nights
for pleasure, I’m going to play with physics, whenever I want to, without
worrying about any importance whatsoever. Within a week I was in the cafeteria
and some guy, fooling around, throws a plate in the air. As the plate went up in
the air I saw it wobble, and I noticed the red medallion of Cornell on the plate
going around. It was pretty obvious to me that the medallion went around faster
than the wobbling. I had nothing to do, so I start to figure out the motion of
the rotating plate. I discover that when the angle is very slight, the medallion
rotates twice as fast as the wobble rate—two to one. It came out of a
complicated equation! Then I thought, “Is there some way I can see in a more
fundamental way, by looking at the forces or the dynamics, why it’s two to one?”
I don’t remember how I did it, but I ultimately worked out what the motion of
the mass particles is, and how all the accelerations balance to make it come out
two to one. I still remember going to Hans Bethe and saying, “Hey, Hans! I
noticed something interesting. Here the plate goes around so, and the reason
it’s two to one is…” and I showed him the accelerations. He says, “Feynman,
that’s pretty interesting, but what’s the importance of it? Why are you doing
it?” “Hah!” I say. “There’s no importance whatsoever. I’m just doing it for the
fun of it.” His reaction didn’t discourage me; I had made up my mind I was going
to enjoy physics and do whatever I liked. I went on to work out equations of
wobbles. Then I thought about how electron orbits start to move in relativity.
Then there’s the Dirac Equation in electrodynamics. And then quantum
electrodynamics. And before I knew it (it was a very short time) I was
“playing”—working, really—with the same old problem that I loved so much, that I
had stopped working on when I went to Los Alamos: my thesis-type problems; all
those old-fashioned, wonderful things. It was effortless. It was easy to play
with these things. It was like uncorking a bottle: Everything flowed out
effortlessly. I almost tried to resist it! There was no importance to what I was
doing, but ultimately there was. The diagrams and the whole business that I got
the Nobel Prize for came from that piddling around with the wobbling plate.
