---
layout: book
title: The Road to Character
author: David Brooks
isbn: 0812983416
rating: 5
---

The book's main argument is that there are two types of virtues: Résumé virtues
– the traits that drive external success Eulogy virtues - Those that will be
talked about at your funeral, i.e. kindness, honesty And that throughout life we
are taught to focus only in the first ones.

Traditional education focuses on making you excel at math or writing (abilities
that will help you succeed professionally) while not spending enough time
developing the self, learning how to be.

The question then becomes: How can I learn to be a better person?

Brooks' answer is that we learn how to be by reading about people who've lived
great and integral lives.

Up until this point I was fascinated. Unfortunately, I didn't like the choice of
characters that were presented in the book, since most of them I couldn't admire
nor resonate with – either due to their religious, political, or general world
view.

The conclusion of the book I found very good too. The most interesting ideas
were:

Every society creates a moral ecology. When you behave consistently with your
society's moral ecology, people smile at you, and you're encouraged to continue
acting in that way. Over the last decades we've switched from valuing
introversion, character, and discipline to now valuing the individual and
self-expression. This switch of values has led us to focus more on résumé
virtues than on eulogy virtues. Every day is a moral struggle, we're constantly
choosing between what's right and what's wrong, and character is built precisely
there, in the course of our inner confrontations. Character is built in the
struggle against our own weakness.

Favorite quotes:

"You become more disciplined, considerate, and loving through a thousand small
acts of self-control, sharing, service, friendship, and refined enjoyment. If
you make disciplined, caring choices, you are slowly engraving certain
tendencies into your mind ... If you don't develop a coherent character in this
way, life will fall to pieces sooner or later. You will become a slave to your
passions. But if you do behave with habitual self discipline, you will become
constant and dependable"

"We are all ultimately saved by grace. The struggle against weakness often has a
U shape. You are living your life and then you get knocked off course – either
by an overwhelming love, or by failure, illness, loss of employment, or twist of
fate. The shape is advance-retreat-advance. In retreat you admit your need and
surrender your crown. You open up space that others might fill. And grace floods
in."
